Feature blog 1.30: user namespaces (#45354)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-03-15-userns-beta/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.30: User-namespace hits Beta!"

> date: 2024-03-13

Author: I used this date as a placeholder. If there is any date I should use, let me know

> date: 2024-03-15

Reviewer: Release comms will be in touch about this.

> date: 2024-03-15

Reviewer 2: @rata  please use date 2024-04-22

> date: 2024-03-15

Author: Added, thanks!

signals to, etc. Furthermore, capabilities granted are only valid inside the
user namespace and not on the host, which also limits the impact a container
escape can have.

![UIDs/GIDs layout for userns](userns-ids.png)

Without using a user namespace, a container running as root in the case of a
container breakout, has root privileges on the node. And if some capabilities
were granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None
of this is true when using user namespaces (modulo bugs, of course 🙂).

## Changes in 1.30

The only change in Kubernetes 1.30, besides moving to Beta, is that we now allow
the kubelet to use custom ranges fod the UIDs/GIDs mapping.

See the documentation for how to use it.

## Demo

A few weeks ago, [CVE-2024-21626][runc-cve] was disclosed. This **vulnerability
score is 8.6 (HIGH)** and allows an attacker to escape a container and
**read/write to any path on the node and other pods hosted on the same node**.

Rodrigo created a demo which exploits [CVE 2024-21626][runc-cve] and shows how
the exploit that works without user namespaces, **it is mitigated when user
namespaces are in use.**

> {{< youtube id="" title="Mitigation of CVE-2024-21626 on Kubernetes by enabling User Namespace">}}

Author: I'll update this when the video is uploaded.

Reviewer: My tip: mark the PR as held but not WIP, so it's obvious that a review is wanted and also that we shouldn't merge it.

Author: Added the video link

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.30: User-namespace hits Beta!"
date: 2024-03-15
slug: userns-beta
---

**Authors:** Rodrigo Campos Catelin (Microsoft), Giuseppe Scrivano (Red Hat), Sascha Grunert (Red Hat)

Linux provides different namespaces to isolate processes from each other. A

> typical Kubernetes pod runs with a network namespace, to isolate the network

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
typical Kubernetes pod runs within a network namespace to isolate the network
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> identity, a PID namespace, to isolate the processes, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
identity, a PID namespace to isolate the processes, etc.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> One Linux namespace that was left behind is the user namespace. This namespace

Reviewer 3: Do we wanna link here?
```suggestion
One Linux namespace that was left behind is the [user namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html). This namespace
```

> allows to isolate the UIDs and GIDs we use inside the container from the ones on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
allows us to isolate the UIDs and GIDs we use inside the container from the ones on
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

the host.

> This is a powerful abstraction that allows to run containers as "root": we are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is a powerful abstraction that allows us to run containers as "root": we are
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

root inside the container and we can do everything root can inside the pod,
but our interactions with the host are limited to what a non-privileged user can
do. This is great to limit the impact of a container breakout.

In Kubernetes v1.25 we introduced support for user namespaces for only stateless
pods. Kubernetes 1.28 lifted that restriction and now, with Kubernetes 1.30, we
are moving to beta!

## What is a user namespace?

A user namespace is a Linux feature that isolates the user and group identifiers

> (UIDs and GIDs) of the containers from the ones on the host. The identifiers in

Reviewer 3: We use those abbreviations in the first paragraph and think we should introduce them there.

Author: Good idea, moved it there.

are limited: only read/write what a file allows to others, as it will never
have permission owner or group permission (the UIDs/GIDs on the host are
guaranteed to be different for different containers).

 * _Increased host isolation_: As the UIDs and GIDs are mapped to unprivileged
users on the host, if a container escapes the container boundaries, even if it
is running as root inside the container, it has no privileges on the host. This
greatly protects what host files it can read/write, which process it can send
signals to, etc. Furthermore, capabilities granted are only valid inside the
user namespace and not on the host, which also limits the impact a container
escape can have.

![UIDs/GIDs layout for userns](userns-ids.jpg)

Without using a user namespace, a container running as root in the case of a
container breakout, has root privileges on the node. And if some capabilities
were granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None
of this is true when using user namespaces (modulo bugs, of course 🙂).

## Changes in 1.30

The only change in Kubernetes 1.30, besides moving to Beta, is that we now allow

> the kubelet to use custom ranges fod the UIDs/GIDs mapping.

Reviewer 4: s/fod/for/

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> the kubelet to use custom ranges for the UIDs/GIDs mapping.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to mention the enhanced testing in Kubernetes as well as cri-tools?

See [the documentation][userns-doc] for how to configure custom ranges to use
for the mapping.

> [userns-doc]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/user-namespaces/#set-up-a-node-to-support-user-namespaces

Author: The documentation PR explaining it will be merged for 1.30. This link exists, but doesn't have the info about the custom ranges yet. I guess this is fine, as the blog post will be published after the release? Or how should I link to the documentation otherwise?

> See [the documentation][userns-doc] for how to configure custom ranges to use
> for the mapping.
> 
> [userns-doc]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/user-namespaces/#set-up-a-node-to-support-user-namespaces

Reviewer: It's fine to link to documentation that will not merge until the release; here's how to do that:
```suggestion
See the [documentation](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/user-namespaces/#set-up-a-node-to-support-user-namespaces)
on user namespaces for how to configure custom ranges to use for the mapping.
```

- no definite article inside the anchor text
- site relative hyperlinks
- avoid footnote-style hyperlinks

Author: Applied, thanks!

## Demo

> A few weeks ago, [CVE-2024-21626][runc-cve] was disclosed. This **vulnerability

Reviewer: Check if this “few” will be true after the v1.30 release has happened

Author: It was released on Jan 31, updated to a few months ago.

**read/write to any path on the node and other pods hosted on the same node**.

Rodrigo created a demo which exploits [CVE 2024-21626][runc-cve] and shows how

> the exploit that works without user namespaces, **it is mitigated when user

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the exploit that works without user namespaces, **is mitigated when user
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

the exploit that works without user namespaces, **it is mitigated when user
namespaces are in use.**

{{< youtube id="" title="Mitigation of CVE-2024-21626 on Kubernetes by enabling User Namespace">}}

> Please note that with user namespaces we can do on the host file-system what the
> permission bits for "others" allows us.

Reviewer: (nit)
Only use “we” to mean “the blog authors” or “the entire Kubernetes project”; don't include the reader in “we”:
```suggestion
Please note that with user namespaces you can do on the host file-system what the
permission bits for "others" allows you to do.
```

If you did mean the blog authors, I got it wrong and please skip this feedback.

Author: Right. An attacker seems more clear, updated to:

```
Please note that with user namespaces an attacker can do on the host file-system
what the permission bits for "others" allows.
```

[runc-cve]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/security/advisories/GHSA-xr7r-f8xq-vfvv

## Node system requirements

There are requirements on the Linux kernel version as well as the container
runtime to use this feature.

On Linux you need Linux 6.3 or greater. This is because the feature relies on a
kernel feature named idmap mounts, and support to use idmap mounts with tmpfs
was merged in Linux 6.3.

If you are using [CRI-O][crio] with crun, as always you can expect support for
Kubernetes 1.30 with CRI-O 1.30. Please note you also need [crun][crun] 1.9 or

> greater.  If you are using CRI-O with [runc][runc], this is still not supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
greater. If you are using CRI-O with [runc][runc], this is still not supported.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> containerd support is currently targeted for [containerd][containerd] 2.0 and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Containerd support is currently targeted for [containerd][containerd] 2.0 and
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

the same crun version requirements apply. If you are using containerd with runc,
this is still not supported.

Please note that containerd 1.7 added _experimental_ support for user
namespaces as implemented in Kubernetes 1.25 and 1.26. We did a redesign in
Kubernetes 1.27, which requires changes in the container runtime. Those changes
are not present in containerd 1.7, so it only works in terms of user namespaces
support, with Kubernetes 1.25 and 1.26.

Another limitation present in containerd 1.7 is that it needs to change the

> ownership of every file and directory inside the container image, during Pod

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ownership of every file and directory inside the container image during Pod
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

startup. This means it has a storage overhead and can significantly impact the

> container startup latency. Containerd 2.0 will probably include a implementation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
container startup latency. Containerd 2.0 will probably include an implementation
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.30: User-namespace hits Beta!"
date: 2024-03-15
slug: userns-beta
---

**Authors:** Rodrigo Campos Catelin (Microsoft), Giuseppe Scrivano (Red Hat), Sascha Grunert (Red Hat)

Linux provides different namespaces to isolate processes from each other. A
typical Kubernetes pod runs within a network namespace to isolate the network

> identity, a PID namespace to isolate the processes, etc.

Reviewer 5: For example, a typical and can drop the etc. at the end.

Author: Fixed, thanks!

One Linux namespace that was left behind is the [user
namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html). This
namespace allows us to isolate the user and group identifiers (UIDs and GIDs) we
use inside the container from the ones on the host.

This is a powerful abstraction that allows us to run containers as "root": we
are root inside the container and we can do everything root can inside the pod,
but our interactions with the host are limited to what a non-privileged user can

> do. This is great to limit the impact of a container breakout.

Author: Okay, so I added that like this:

```
This is a powerful abstraction that allows us to run containers as "root": we
are root inside the container and we can do everything root can inside the pod,
but our interactions with the host are limited to what a non-privileged user can
do. This is great to limit the impact of a container breakout.

A container breakout is when a process inside a container is able to break out
onto the host using some unpatched vulnerability in the container runtime or the
kernel and able to access / modify files on the host or other containers. If we
run our pods with user namespaces, the privileges are reduced and the files 
outside the container it can access are limited too.
```

> do. This is great to limit the impact of a container breakout.

Author: Added a small fix, check out the latest version and not that :)

> do. This is great to limit the impact of a container breakout.

Reviewer 5: Looks good! Thanks :)

In Kubernetes v1.25 we introduced support for user namespaces for only stateless
pods. Kubernetes 1.28 lifted that restriction and now, with Kubernetes 1.30, we
are moving to beta!

## What is a user namespace?

> A user namespace is a Linux feature that isolates the UIDs and GIDs of the

Author: Fixed, thanks

containers from the ones on the host. The identifiers in the container can be
mapped to identifiers on the host in a way where the host UID/GIDs used for
different containers never overlap. Furthermore, the identifiers can be mapped
to unprivileged non-overlapping UIDs and GIDs on the host. This brings two key
benefits:

 * _Prevention of lateral movement_: As the UIDs and GIDs for different
containers are mapped to different UIDs and GIDs on the host, containers have a
harder time attacking each other even if they escape the container boundaries.
For example, if container A is running with different UIDs and GIDs on the host

> than container B, the operations it can do on container B’s files and process

Reviewer 2: should this read
"files and processes" ? i.e. process plural form

Author: Good catch, fixed it now. Thanks!

are limited: only read/write what a file allows to others, as it will never
have permission owner or group permission (the UIDs/GIDs on the host are
guaranteed to be different for different containers).

 * _Increased host isolation_: As the UIDs and GIDs are mapped to unprivileged
users on the host, if a container escapes the container boundaries, even if it
is running as root inside the container, it has no privileges on the host. This
greatly protects what host files it can read/write, which process it can send
signals to, etc. Furthermore, capabilities granted are only valid inside the
user namespace and not on the host, which also limits the impact a container
escape can have.

![UIDs/GIDs layout for userns](userns-ids.png)

Without using a user namespace, a container running as root in the case of a
container breakout, has root privileges on the node. And if some capabilities
were granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None
of this is true when using user namespaces (modulo bugs, of course 🙂).

> 

Author: How would that look like? We already link to the user namespace manpage at the beginning and talk about Linux namespaces to isolate processes.

How would you clarify that? Do you have a specific suggestion?

> 

Reviewer 5: We can add something like a `Note: User namespaces are a different concept from kubernetes namespaces` and link to documentation for both.

> 

Author: Thanks, I think I was having writers block. I added this:

```
Note: Linux user namespaces are a different concept from [kubernetes
namespaces](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/).
The former is a Linux kernel feature, the latter is a kubernetes feature.
```

## Changes in 1.30

In Kubernetes 1.30, besides moving to Beta, we:

>  * Introduced a way for the kubelet to use custom ranges for the UIDs/GIDs mapping 

Reviewer 5: Do we want to show how that works?

Author: I wanted to, but I ended up doing c&p from the documentation. I thought it was better to link there (and in any case wait until review settles and we have the final version).

Reviewer 5: sounds good!

than container B, the operations it can do on container B's files and processes
are limited: only read/write what a file allows to others, as it will never
have permission owner or group permission (the UIDs/GIDs on the host are
guaranteed to be different for different containers).

 * _Increased host isolation_: As the UIDs and GIDs are mapped to unprivileged
users on the host, if a container escapes the container boundaries, even if it
is running as root inside the container, it has no privileges on the host. This
greatly protects what host files it can read/write, which process it can send
signals to, etc. Furthermore, capabilities granted are only valid inside the
user namespace and not on the host, which also limits the impact a container
escape can have.

![UIDs/GIDs layout for userns](userns-ids.png)

Without using a user namespace, a container running as root in the case of a
container breakout, has root privileges on the node. And if some capabilities
were granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None
of this is true when using user namespaces (modulo bugs, of course 🙂).

## Changes in 1.30

> In Kubernetes 1.30, besides moving to Beta, we:

Reviewer: Do you prefer:
```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.30, besides moving to user namespaces to beta, the contributors working on
this feature:
```
?

Author: Applied.
